Add .github/copilot-instructions.md for AI coding agent guidance (#4422)
canonical/mir: .github/copilot-instructions.md

- **miral/** (Mir Abstraction Layer): ABI-stable layer in `include/miral/miral/` providing shell-building APIs like `MirRunner`, `WindowManagementPolicy`, window managers, and accessibility features.
- **Platform backends**: `src/platforms/{gbm-kms,atomic-kms,x11,wayland,eglstream-kms,virtual}` - hardware abstraction layers for different graphics/input systems.
- **evdev-rs**: Rust-based input platform using CXX bindings (`src/platforms/evdev-rs/`, `Cargo.toml`).

### Key Components

- **Server** (`src/server/`): Core compositor services (scene, compositor, graphics, frontend_xwayland)
- **Renderers** (`src/renderers/gl/`): GL-based rendering implementations
- **Tests** (`tests/`): Unit tests, integration tests, performance tests using gtest/gmock

## Build System

### Building

```bash
mkdir build && cd build
cmake ..
make
```

### Speed optimizations

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER_LAUNCHER=ccache \
      -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER_LAUNCHER=ccache \
      -DMIR_USE_PRECOMPILED_HEADERS=OFF \
      -DMIR_USE_LD=mold ..
```

### Key CMake patterns

- `mir_add_wrapped_executable()`: Creates executables with wrapper scripts

> - Compile commands available at `build/compile_commands.json` for LSP

Reviewer: Oh no, it misunderstood me. It removed the whole section...

@copilot Re-add the line about `mir_add_wrapped_executable`

- **Exception safety**: Provide at least the basic exception safety guarantee
- **Preconditions**: May be verified using `assert` but are not required to be checked
- **Pointers**: Assumed to be valid unless explicitly documented otherwise

### Comments

- **File headers**: Include copyright, license, author, and description
- **Class comments**: Describe purpose and usage; include Doxygen-style documentation in headers
- **Function comments**: Describe what the function does, not how (unless complex)
- **TODO comments**: Use format `// TODO: Description`
- **Code documentation**: Comment tricky or non-obvious code
- **Avoid obvious comments**: Don't state what the code clearly does

### Best Practices

- **Keep functions small**: Prefer functions under 40 lines
- **Avoid global state**: Minimize use of global variables
- **Forward declarations**: Use when possible to reduce header dependencies
- **Inline functions**: Only for small functions (≤10 lines)
- **Preprocessor macros**: Avoid when possible; prefer inline functions, enums, and const variables
- **Streams**: Use only for logging, prefer `printf`-style for other I/O

> - **Reference parameters**: Input parameters should be `const` references or values; output parameters should be pointers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Reference parameters**: Input parameters should be `const` references or values; output parameters should be be used only with C APIs, or functions/methods that modify inputs. They should be non-const references when possible. If a function/ method generates multiple outputs, they should be returned from the function/method as a pair/tuple.
```

Reviewer: @copilot Based on the current conventions in this codebase, does this suggestion hold up?

{
    // Arrange, Act, Assert
}
```

## Shell Development with mirAL

### Typical Shell Structure

```cpp
#include <miral/runner.h>
#include <miral/window_management_options.h>

int main(int argc, char const* argv[])
{
    using namespace miral;
    
    MirRunner runner{argc, argv};
    
    return runner.run_with({
        WindowManagementOptions{},
        DisplayConfigurationOption{},
        // Add custom policies, options, features
    });
}
```

### Window Management

- Implement `miral::WindowManagementPolicy` for custom window management
- Use `miral::WindowManagerTools` to interact with windows
- See `examples/miral-shell/` for reference implementations
- Built-in managers: `FloatingWindowManager`, `CanonicalWindowManager`, `MinimalWindowManager`

## Wayland Protocol Integration

1. Place protocol XML in `wayland-protocols/`
2. Generate wrappers using `mir_wayland_generator`:

```cmake
add_custom_command(
    OUTPUT ${PROTOCOL}_wrapper.cpp ${PROTOCOL}_wrapper.h
    COMMAND "sh" "-c" "mir_wayland_generator zwp_ ${XML} header >${PROTOCOL}_wrapper.h"
    COMMAND "sh" "-c" "mir_wayland_generator zwp_ ${XML} source >${PROTOCOL}_wrapper.cpp"
)
```

> 3. Integrate with `miral::WaylandExtensions` in your shell

Reviewer: I think this reads like an art tutorial:
1. Draw a circle
2. Draw an oval
3. Draw the rest of the Owl.

This is missing a few steps:
- Implement a skeleton of the Wayland protocol under `/frontend_wayland`, in the `mir::frontend` namespace.
- Expose a `create_*` function to create the global manager of the protocol
- If the protocol requires the use of an existing server component (`MainLoop`, `CompositeEventFilter`, ...), it should be passed down `WaylandConnector::Context` to the `create_*` function.
- If the protocol requires a new server component, it should be added in the appropriate place. Either in `DefaultServerConfiguration` and exposed via `Server`, or in `WaylandConnector::Context`

# Mir Copilot Instructions

This document provides essential knowledge for working with the Mir codebase, including architecture, coding standards, and workflows.

## Overview

Mir is a Wayland compositor library written in C++23 with some Rust components. It provides a stable ABI layer (mirAL) for building shells, handling graphics/input hardware abstraction, and window management.

## Architecture

### Core Layers

- **include/**: Public API headers with minimal implementation details. Interfaces here should not expose platform-specific types.
- **src/**: Implementation organized by component. Internal headers stay within their component directory.
- **miral/** (Mir Abstraction Layer): ABI-stable layer in `include/miral/miral/` providing shell-building APIs like `MirRunner`, `WindowManagementPolicy`, window managers, and accessibility features.
- **Platform backends**: `src/platforms/{gbm-kms,atomic-kms,x11,wayland,eglstream-kms,virtual}` - hardware abstraction layers for different graphics/input systems.

> - **evdev-rs**: Rust-based input platform using CXX bindings (`src/platforms/evdev-rs/`, `Cargo.toml`).

Reviewer 2: @copilot mention all input platforms instead.

### Key Components

- **Server** (`src/server/`): Core compositor services (scene, compositor, graphics, frontend_xwayland)
- **Renderers** (`src/renderers/gl/`): GL-based rendering implementations
- **Tests** (`tests/`): Unit tests, integration tests, performance tests using gtest/gmock

## Key CMake Patterns

- `mir_add_wrapped_executable()`: Creates executables with wrapper scripts

> 

Reviewer 2: @copilot remove this.

   - Integrate with `miral::WaylandExtensions` in your shell to enable/disable the protocol

## Linting

Pre-commit hooks (`.pre-commit-config.yaml`) handle:

- Trailing whitespace
- End-of-file fixers
- Markdown formatting (mdformat)
- Large files check

Run: `pre-commit run --all-files`

## Repository-Specific Guidelines

### Do Not Check In CodeQL Files

**Important**: Do not commit CodeQL database files or analysis results to the repository. These files are:
- Generated locally during code analysis
- Large binary files that don't belong in version control
- Automatically generated by CI/CD pipelines when needed

If you generate CodeQL databases locally for analysis, ensure they are:
- Stored outside the repository directory, or
- Properly excluded via `.gitignore`

Common CodeQL artifacts to avoid:
- CodeQL database directories (usually named `codeql-db` or similar)
- `.sarif` files containing analysis results
- Custom CodeQL query results

### Build Artifacts

Build artifacts are already excluded via `.gitignore`. Do not commit:
- Compiled binaries
- Object files
- Build directories (e.g., `build/`, `build-*/`, `cmake-*/`)
- IDE-specific files (except those already tracked)

> 

Reviewer 2: @copilot drop this section, .gitignore should be enough for this.
